# [How it works] (@id hiw)

MethodOfLines.jl makes heavy use of `Symbolics.jl` and `SymbolicUtils.jl`, namely it's rule matching features to recognize terms which require particular discretizations.

See [here](https://github.com/SciML/MethodOfLines.jl/blob/master/src/MOL_discretization.jl) for the highest level overview of the algorithm.

Given your discretization and `PDESystem`, we take each independent variable defined on the space to be discretized and create a corresponding range. We then take each dependent variable and create an array of symbolic variables to represent it in its discretized form. This is stored in a [`DiscreteSpace`](https://github.com/SciML/MethodOfLines.jl/blob/master/src/discretization/discretize_vars.jl) object, a useful abstraction.

We recognize boundary conditions, i.e. whether they are on the upper or lower ends of the domain, or periodic [here](https://github.com/SciML/PDEBase.jl/blob/master/src/parse_boundaries.jl), and use this information to construct the interior of the domain for each equation [here](https://github.com/SciML/MethodOfLines.jl/blob/master/src/system_parsing/interior_map.jl). Each PDE is matched to each dependent variable in this step by which variable is of highest order in each PDE, with precedence given to time derivatives. This dictates which boundary conditions reduce the size of the interior for which PDE. This is done to ensure that there will be the same number of equations as discrete variable unknowns, so that the system of equations is balanced.

Next, the boundary conditions are discretized, creating an equation for each point on the boundary in terms of the discretized variables, replacing any space derivatives in the direction of the boundary with their upwind finite difference expressions. [This](https://github.com/SciML/MethodOfLines.jl/blob/master/src/discretization/generate_bc_eqs.jl) is the place to look to see how this happens.

After that, the system of PDEs is discretized, creating a finite difference equation for each point in their interior. Specific terms are recognized, and the best implemented scheme for these terms dispatched. For example, advection terms are discretized with the upwind scheme. There are also special schemes for the nonlinear Laplacian and spherical Laplacian. See [here for how this term matching occurs](https://github.com/SciML/MethodOfLines.jl/blob/master/src/discretization/generate_finite_difference_rules.jl), note that the order the generated rules are applied is important, with more specific rules applied first to avoid their terms being matched incorrectly by more general rules.  The [SymbolicUtils.jl docs](https://symbolicutils.juliasymbolics.org/rewrite/) are a useful companion here. See [here for the practical implementation of the finite difference schemes](https://github.com/SciML/MethodOfLines.jl/blob/master/src/discretization/differential_discretizer.jl).

Now we have a system of equations which are either ODEs, linear, or nonlinear equations and an equal number of unknowns. See [here for the system](@ref brusssys) that is generated for the Brusselator at low point count. The structure of the system is simplified with `ModelingToolkit.structural_simplify`, and then either an `ODEProblem` or `NonlinearProblem` is returned. Under the hood, the `ODEProblem` generates a fast semidiscretization, written in Julia with `RuntimeGeneratedFunctions`. See [here for an example of the generated code](@ref brusscode) for the Brusselator system at low point count.
